ChatGPT4
on translation regimes
for VMSAv8-64 architectures

result: we require the ability to read the VM's "CPU registers."

__________________________________________________________________________

To determine the translation regime(s) being used on the system you are
introspecting, you will need to examine the system's control registers.
These control registers determine the current execution state,
translation regime, and other configurations of the system. The
registers you should look at are:

CurrentEL (Current Exception Level): This register indicates the current
exception level (EL) of the system. It can have values EL0, EL1, EL2, or
EL3.

SCR_EL3 (Secure Configuration Register): This register contains bits
that control the security state, execution state, and endianness of the
Non-secure EL1 and EL0 exception levels.

HCR_EL2 (Hypervisor Configuration Register): This register contains bits
that control the behavior of the EL1 exception level when the processor
is in EL2. The E2H and TGE bits are particularly relevant for
determining the translation regime.

SCTLR_ELx (System Control Register for each EL): This register contains
bits that enable or disable the MMU, caches, and other system features
at each exception level.

By examining the values of these registers, you can determine the
translation regime being used on the system. For example, if CurrentEL
indicates EL1 and HCR_EL2.{E2H, TGE} = {0, 0}, then the system is using
the Secure EL1&0 or Non-secure EL1&0 translation regime, depending on
the security state determined by SCR_EL3.NS.

Keep in mind that in order to introspect these registers, you would need
to have some level of access to the system's hardware or have a method
to access the guest virtual machine's registers when performing virtual
machine introspection (VMI). This might involve using debugging tools or
implementing VMI-specific techniques to access these registers from the
host system.
